---
layout: post
title:  "The Story of Point"
date:   2016-06-10 19:27:32 +0800
category: "jekyll update"
author: "kouko"
---


The great chicago fire, one of the first corporate conglomerates, and a badly printed ruler helped forge our unique measurement system for type. Paris typefounder Simon Fournier proposed a system of 72 points per inch in 1737, and published a printed scale for reference. Depending on the weather, the printed scale changed in size. Since the ruler was used as a reference, printers and font makers su ered from inconsistent tools and measures. In 1770, typefounder and printer François-Ambroise Didot proposed a solution by de ning a point as exactly 1/72 of a French inch. (A French inch is equal to 1.0638 English inches.)

Type sizes were originally named. Catalogs with such names appeared as early as 1592. Some of the names came from the type of book produced in that size. Cicero was a size used for editions of classical authors; Primer was used for religious books ordered by Henry VIII. Another class of names boasted the type’s beauty, such as Paragon and Nonpareil. English meant a typeface in the blackface style as well as in about 14-point type. There was no relationship between the names and de ned standards like the inch: Excelsior was about 3 point, Brilliant 4, Diamond 4.2, Pearl 4.8, Agate Ruby 5, Nonpareil 6, Minion 7, Brevier 8, Bourgeois 9, Long Primer 10, Small Pica 11, Pica 12, English 14, Columbian 2-Line 15, Great Primer 18, Paragon 20, Double Small Pica 22.

When Simon Fournier published his Tables des Proportions qu’il faut observer entre les caractères in 1737, he based his point system on the “cicero,” which was 0.1648 of an inch, and he divided it into 12 points. In The Practice of Typography (2nd edition; New York: Century Publishing, 1902), Theodore Low De Vinne speculated that in subsequent years Fournier adjusted his point so that it would  t existing sizes of type as well as possible (page 155). François- Ambroise Didot improved on Fournier’s system by harmo- nizing it with the existing French foot measurement, which was 12.7892 American inches. From 1770 on, the Didot point became the European standard. In 1795, the French government adopted the metric system. In 1879 Hermann Berthold revised the French Didot point standard to suit the metric system. George Bruce of New York proposed a system, in 1882, where sizes increased by the sixth root of 2,so that each size was 112.2462 percent of the size before it and double the size of seven sizes down.

Enter Nelson C. Hawks (1841–1929). Hawks believed that he “invented” the point system. During his employ- ment with the foundry Marder, Luse & Co., as manager of the Paci c Type Foundry in San Francisco, Hawks noted that pica type was 1/6th of an inch high but Nonpareil was half the size of pica. Hawks called Nonpareil 6 point. All the other named sizes were given a point size close to their actual size. Fournier’s typographic point was .0137 of an inch, Didot’s was .0148, and the Hawks American point was .0138. Hawks persuaded Luse and Marder to back his point system. He used the same method of size division as Fournier, dividing 1 inch by 6 to get 1 pica, and dividing it again by 12 to get 1 point. However, the American Point Sys- tem standardized in 1886 is di erent from Hawks’s original idea in that one pica is not exactly 1/6 inch, since the Type Founders Association de ned the standard pica to be the Johnson Pica, which was tied to the metric system: 83 picas would equal 35 centimeters exactly.  us, one pica equals 4.217 millimeters and one point is .01383486 inches, so that 6 picas equal .996 of an inch, to the confusion of generations of young typographers. The height, called type height, is the distance from the face that touches the paper to the feet: this magic number became .918 of an inch (Explanation of the Point System of Printing Type with Specimens, Alameda, California, 1918, pages 3–4).

The Johnson Pica was named after Lawrence Johnson who had succeeded Binney & Ronaldson, the  rst Ameri- can typefoundry, founded in Philadelphia in 1796 by two Scotsmen. The typefoundry became L. Johnson & Co. in 1843, and  nally MacKellar, Smiths & Jordan in 1867. The company was the largest typefounding business in America when, in 1892, it was amalgamated with others into atf. B&R used the typefounding equipment of Benjamin Frank- lin and run by Franklin’s grandson, Benjamin Franklin Bache. Franklin had purchased it from Fournier when he visited France for diplomatic purposes. The standards B&R used in sizing their molds came from Franklin’s equipment. In Fournier’s system, the size Franklin called pica would have been .992 of an inch, instead of .996, because 150 years of reproduction wear on the molds increased the type size by 0.004 inch. The system which Hawks believed he had invented was probably Fournier’s system plus wear. Richard Hopkins, author of Origin of The American Point System for Printers’ Type Measurement (Terra Alta; Hill & Dale Press, 1976), says: “ e major issue then was the expense involved in re-tooling hundreds of molds in each foundry to make them all conform to the new system. If they could avoid just a few sizes being altered, it would save hundreds of thou- sands of dollars.  at is why the MS&J (Johnson) pica was adopted” (pages 16, 63).

The Great Chicago Fire of 1871 destroyed Marder, Luse & Co. In rebuilding, the foundry decided to adopt the John- son pica.  us the two largest members of the 23-member American Type Founders secured the standard Pica mea- surement. Atf was one of the  rst conglomerates and was formed as the Linotype machine made the need for found- ries obsolete.

Today, page layout software uses a 72-point inch because Adobe PostScript is based on that system, although some programs let you set whatever measurement system you want. Hawkes would be appalled.

Frank Romano
